--- page 1 ---
CS 70
Discrete Mathematics and Probability Theory
Fall 2026
Course Notes
Note 10
1
Graph Theory: An Introduction
One of the fundamental ideas in computer science is the notion of abstraction: capturing the essence or the
core of some complex situation by a simple model. Some of the largest and most complex entities we might
deal with include the internet, the brain, maps, and social networks. In each case, there is an underlying
“network” or graph that captures the important features that help us understand these entities more deeply.
In the case of the internet, this network or graph specifies how web pages link to one another. In the case
of the brain, it is the interconnection network between neurons. We can describe these ideas in the beautiful
framework of graph theory, which is the subject of this note.
Remarkably, graph theory has its origins in a simple evening pastime of the residents of Königsberg, Prussia
(nowadays Kaliningrad, Russia) a few centuries ago. Through their city ran the Pregel river, depicted on
the left in Figure 1 below, separating Königsberg into two banks A and D and islands B and C. Connecting
the islands to the mainland were seven bridges. As the residents of the city took their evening walks, many
would try to solve the challenge of picking a route that would cross each of the seven bridges precisely once
and return to the starting point.
A
B
C
D
(a) The city of Königsberg.
A
B
D
C
(b) The (multi-)graph modeling the bridge connec-
tions in Königsberg.
Figure 1: Two equivalent representations of the city of Königsberg.
In 1736, the brilliant mathematician Leonhard Euler proved this task to be impossible. How did he do it?
The key is to realize that for the purpose of choosing such a route, Figure 1a can be replaced with Figure 1b,
where each land mass A, B, C, and D is replaced by a point (shown as a small circle), and each bridge by a
line segment. With this abstraction in place, the task of choosing a route can be restated as follows: trace
through all the line segments and return to the starting point without lifting the pen, and without traversing
any line segment more than once. The proof of impossibility is simple. Under these tracing rules, the pen
must enter each point as many times as it exits it, and therefore the number of line segments incident to that
point must be even. But in Figure 1b, each point has an odd number of line segments incident to it, so it is
impossible to carry out such a tracing. Actually Euler did more. He gave a precise condition under which
the tracing can be carried out. For this reason, Euler is generally hailed as the inventor of graph theory.
CS 70, Fall 2026, Note 10
1


--- page 2 ---
1.1
Formal definitions
Formally, an (undirected) graph is defined by a set of vertices V and a set of edges E. The vertices corre-
spond to the points in Figure 1 above, and the edges correspond to the line segments between the vertices.
In Figure 1, V = {A,B,C,D} and E = {{A,B},{A,B},{A,C},{B,C},{B,D},{B,D},{C,D}}. However,
note that here E is a multiset (a set where an element can appear multiple times). This is because in the
Königsberg example there are multiple bridges between a pair of banks. Unless otherwise stated, we will
generally not allow multiple edges between a single pair of vertices, i.e., we will require E to be a set, not a
multi-set. Thus between any pair of vertices there is either 0 or 1 edge.
More generally, we can also define a directed graph. If an edge in an undirected graph represents a street,
then an edge in a directed graph represents a one-way street. To make this formal, let V be the vertex set of
a graph G. Then the set of directed edges E is a subset of V ×V, i.e. E ⊆V ×V. (Recall here that U ×V
denotes the Cartesian product of sets U and V, defined as U ×V = {(u,v) : u ∈U and v ∈V}.) For example,
if V = {1,2,3,4} and E = {(1,2),(1,3),(1,4)}, then the corresponding graph is G1 as shown in Figure 2.
1
2
3
4
G1
1
2
3
4
5
G2
Figure 2: Examples of directed and undirected graphs, respectively.
Note that each edge in G1 has a direction specified by an arrow; thus, for example, (1,2) ∈E but (2,1) /∈
E. Directed graphs are useful in modeling one-way relationships, such as one-way streets between two
locations. On the other hand, if each edge goes in both directions, i.e., (u,v) ∈E iff (v,u) ∈E, then we call
the graph undirected. For undirected graphs we drop the ordered pair notation for edges, and simply denote
the edge between u and v by the set {u,v}. Undirected graphs naturally model relationships such as two-way
streets between locations; an example is given by G2 in Figure 2. For simplicity, we omit the arrowheads
when drawing edges in undirected graphs. In either case, a graph is formally specified as an ordered pair
G = (V,E), where V is the vertex set and E is the edge set (directed or undirected).
Concept check! What are the vertex and edge sets V and E for graph G2?
Let us continue our discussion with an example from social networks, an area in which graph theory plays
a fundamental role. Suppose you wish to model a social network in which vertices correspond to people,
and edges correspond to the following relationship between people: We say Alex recognizes Bridget if Alex
knows who Bridget is (but Bridget does not necessarily know who Alex is). We would use a directed graph
to model this situation, since the relationship is not symmetrical. On the other hand, if we instead wanted to
model the relationship that Alex and Bridget know each other, then we would use an undirected graph.
Introducing some further useful terminology, we say that edge e = {u,v} (or e = (u,v)) is incident on vertices
u and v, and that u and v are neighbors or adjacent. If G is undirected, then the degree of vertex u ∈V is
the number of edges incident on u, i.e., degree(u) = |{v ∈V : {u,v} ∈E}|. A vertex u whose degree is 0 is
called an isolated vertex, since there is no edge which connects u to the rest of the graph.
CS 70, Fall 2026, Note 10
2


--- page 3 ---
Concept check! What does the degree of a vertex represent in our undirected social network in which an
edge {u,v} means u and v know each other? How should we interpret an isolated vertex?
A directed graph, on the other hand, has two different notions of degree due to the directions on the edges.
Specifically, the in-degree of a vertex u is the number of edges from other vertices to u, and the out-degree
of u is the number of edges from u to other vertices.
Concept check! What do the in-degree and out-degree of a vertex represent in our directed social network
in which an edge (u,v) means u recognizes v?
Finally, our definition of a graph thus far allows edges of the form {u,u} (or (u,u)), i.e., a self-loop. In
our social network, however, this gives us no interesting information (it means that person A recognizes
him/herself!). Thus, here and in general in these notes, we shall assume that our graphs have no self-loops,
unless stated otherwise.
Paths, walks, and cycles.
Let G = (V,E) be an undirected graph. A path in G is a sequence of edges
{v1,v2},{v2,v3},...,{vn−2,vn−1},{vn−1,vn}. In this case we say that there is a path between v1 and vn. For
example, suppose the graph G3 below models a residential neighborhood in which each vertex corresponds
to a house, and two houses u and v are neighbors if there exists a direct road from u to v.
1
2
3
4
G3
Concept check! What is a shortest path from house 2 to house 4 in G3? How about a longest path,
assuming no house is visited twice?
In this class, we assume a path is simple, meaning v1,...,vn are distinct. This makes complete sense in our
housing example G3; if you wanted drive from house 2 to 4 via house 1, why would you visit house 1 more
than once? A cycle (or circuit) is a sequence of edges {v1,v2},{v2,v3},...,{vn−2,vn−1},{vn−1,vn},{vn,v1},
where v1,...,vn are distinct. Thus a cycle is a path from v1 to vn, plus the edge {vn,v1} taking us back to v1
again.
Concept check! Give a cycle starting at house 1 in G3.
Suppose now that your aim is not to go from 2 to 4 as quickly as possible, but to take a leisurely stroll from
2 to 4 via the sequence {2,1},{1,2},{2,3},{3,4}. A sequence of edges with possibly repeated vertices,
such as this one, is called a walk from 2 to 4. Analogous to the relationship between paths and cycles, a tour
is a walk which starts and ends at the same vertex. For example, {2,1},{1,3},{3,4},{4,1},{1,2} is a tour.
Here’s a quick summary of all of these terms:
CS 70, Fall 2026, Note 10
3


--- page 4 ---
no repeated vertices
no repeated edges
start = end
Walk
Path
✓
✓
Tour
✓
Cycle
✓∗
✓
✓
(*except for start and end vertices)
Remark: In this class, we will do our best to remind you of the subtleties in the definitions of the terms;
don’t worry too much about the formal definitions, as long as you understand the ideas.
Connectivity.
Much of what we discuss in this note revolves around the notion of connectivity. A graph
is said to be connected if there is a path between any two distinct vertices. For example, our residential
network G3 above is connected, since one can drive from any house to any other house via some sequence
of direct roads. On the other hand, the network below is disconnected.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Concept check! What would a disconnected vertex represent in our residential network? Why would you
not want to design a neighborhood this way?
Note that any graph (even a disconnected one) always consists of a collection of connected components,
i.e., sets V1,...,Vk of vertices, such that all vertices in a set Vi are connected. For example, the graph above
is not connected, but nevertheless consists of three connected components: V1 = {1,2,3}, V2 = {4}, and
V3 = {5,6,7}.
2
Revisiting the Seven Bridges of Königsberg: Eulerian Tours
With a formal underpinning in graph theory under our belts, we are ready to revisit the Seven Bridges of
Königsberg. What exactly is this problem asking? It says: Given a graph G (in this case, G is an abstraction
of Königsberg), is there a walk in G that uses each edge exactly once? We call any such walk in a graph
an Eulerian walk. (In contrast, by definition a walk can normally visit each edge or vertex as many times
as desired.) Moreover, if an Eulerian walk is closed, i.e., it ends at its starting point, then it is called an
Eulerian tour. Thus, the Seven Bridges of Königsberg asks: Given a graph G, does it have an Eulerian tour?
We now give a precise characterization of this in terms of simpler properties of the graph G. For this, define
an even degree graph as a graph in which all vertices have even degree.
Theorem 10.1 (Euler’s Theorem (1736)). An undirected graph G = (V,E) has an Eulerian tour iff G is even
degree, and connected (except possibly for isolated vertices).
Proof. Proof in the homework.
CS 70, Fall 2026, Note 10
4


--- page 5 ---
Concept check! Why does Theorem 10.1 imply the answer to the Seven Bridges of Königsberg is no?
3
Trees and Complete Graphs
In this section we introduce two very important special classes of graphs, namely complete graphs and trees.
These graphs are maximal and minimal, respectively, among all connected graphs, in a sense that we will
discuss in more detail in Section 5.
3.1
Complete Graphs
We start with the simplest class of graphs, the complete graphs. Why are such graphs called complete?
Because they contain the maximum number of edges possible. In other words, in an (undirected) complete
graph, every pair of (distinct) vertices u and v are connected by an edge {u,v}. The following diagrams
show the complete graphs on n = 2,3,4 vertices, respectively.
K2
K3
K4
Here, the notation Kn denotes the unique complete graph on n vertices. Formally, we can write Kn = (V,E)
for |V| = n and E =

{vi,vj} | vi ̸= vj and vi,vj ∈V
	
.
Concept check!
1. Can you draw K5, the complete graph on n = 5 vertices?
2. What is the degree of every vertex in Kn?
Exercise. How many edges are there in Kn? (Answer: n(n−1)/2.) Verify that the K5 you drew above has
this many edges.
Finally, we can also introduce complete directed graphs, which are defined as you might expect: For any
pair of vertices u and v, both (u,v) and (v,u) belong to E.
3.2
Trees
A tree is a connected graph that contains no cycles. In fact, there are several equivalent definitions for when
a graph G = (V,E) is a tree, including the following:
1. G is connected and contains no cycles.
2. G is connected and has n−1 edges (where n = |V|).
3. G is connected, and the removal of any single edge disconnects G.
4. G has no cycles, and the addition of any single edge creates a cycle.
Here are three examples of trees:
CS 70, Fall 2026, Note 10
5


--- page 6 ---
Concept check!
1. Convince yourself that the three graphs above satisfy all four equivalent definitions of a tree.
2. Give an example of a graph which is not a tree.
Note that, for any given number of vertices n, there are a very large number of possible trees (nn−2 to be
precise). This is in sharp contrast to complete graphs, which are unique for any given n.
Why are trees important? One reason is that many graph-theoretical problems which are computationally
intractable on arbitrary graphs, such as the Maximum Cut problem, are easy to solve on trees. Another
reason is that they model many types of natural relationships between objects. To demonstrate, we introduce
the concept of a rooted tree, an example of which is given below.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
root
internal nodes
leaves
In a rooted tree, there is a designated node called the root, which we think of as sitting at the top of the
tree. The bottom-most nodes are called leaves, and the intermediate nodes are called internal nodes. Note
that in a rooted tree, a root is never a leaf. In particular, this differs from an unrooted tree; in an unrooted
tree, leaves are any vertex of degree 1. The depth d of the tree is the length of the longest path from the
root to a leaf. Moreover, the tree can be thought of as grouped into layers or levels, where the k-th level for
k ∈{0,1,...,d} is the set of vertices which are connected to the root via a path consisting of precisely k
edges.
Concept check!
1. What is the depth of the tree above? (Answer: 3)
2. Which vertices are on level 0 of the tree above? How about on level 3?
Where do rooted trees come in handy? Consider, for example, the setting of bacterial cell division. In this
case, the root might represent a single bacterium, and each subsequent layer corresponds to cell division in
which the bacterium divides into two new bacteria. Rooted trees can also be used to allow fast searching of
ordered sets of elements, such as in binary search trees, which you may have already encountered in your
studies.
One of the nice things about trees is that induction works particularly well in proving properties of them.
Let us demonstrate with a case in point: We shall prove that the first two definitions of a tree given above
are indeed equivalent.
CS 70, Fall 2026, Note 10
6


--- page 7 ---
Theorem 10.2. The statements “G is connected and contains no cycles” and “G is connected and has n−1
edges” are equivalent.
Proof. We proceed by showing the forward and converse directions.
Forward direction. We prove using strong induction on n that if G is connected and contains no cycles, then
G is connected and has n−1 edges. Assume G = (V,E) is connected and contains no cycles.
Base case (n = 1): In this case, G is a single vertex and has no edges. Thus, the claim holds.
Inductive hypothesis: Assume the claim is true for 1 ≤n ≤k.
Inductive proof: We show the claim for n = k +1. Remove an arbitrary vertex v ∈V from G along with its
incident edges, and call the resulting graph G′. Clearly, removing a vertex cannot create a cycle; thus, G′
contains no cycles. However, removing v may result in a disconnected graph G′, in which case the induction
hypothesis cannot be applied to G′ as a whole. Thus, we have two cases to examine — either G′ is connected,
or G′ is disconnected. Here, we show the former case, as it is simpler and captures the essential proof ideas.
The latter case is left as an exercise below.
So, assume G′ is connected. But now G′ is a connected graph with no cycles on k vertices, so we can apply
the induction hypothesis to G′ to conclude that G′ is connected and has k −1 edges. Let us now add v back
to G′ to obtain G. How many edges can be incident on v? Well, since G′ is connected, then if v is incident
on more than one edge, G will contain a cycle. But by assumption G has no cycles! Thus, v must be incident
on one edge, implying G has (k −1)+1 = k edges, as desired.
Converse direction. We prove using contradiction that if G is connected and has n −1 edges, then G is
connected and contains no cycles. Assume G is connected, has n−1 edges, and contains a cycle. Then, by
definition of a cycle, removing any edge in the cycle does not disconnect the graph G. In other words, we
can remove an edge in the cycle to obtain a new connected graph G′ consisting of n −2 edges. However,
we claim that G′ must be disconnected, which will yield our desired contradiction. This is because in order
for a graph to be connected, it must have at least n −1 edges. This is a fact that you have to prove in the
exercise below. This completes the proof of the converse direction.
4
Planar Graphs and Euler’s Formula
A graph is planar if it can be drawn on the plane without crossings. For example, the first four graphs shown
below are planar. Notice that the first and second graphs are the same, but drawn differently. Even though
the second drawing has crossings, the graph is still considered planar since it is possible to draw it without
crossings.
The other three graphs are not planar. The first one of them is the infamous “three houses-three wells graph,”
also called K3,3, (This notation says there are two sets of vertices, each of size three and all edges between
the two sets of vertices are present.) The second is the “complete” graph (every edge is present) with five
nodes, or K5. The third is the four-dimensional cube. We shall soon see how to prove that all three graphs
are non-planar.
A useful concept is the notion of a bipartite graph, G = (V,E) which is a graph where the vertices are split
into two groups and edges only go between groups. More formally, we have V = L ∪R and E ⊆L × R.
Clearly, K3,3 is bipartite. Moreover, the four dimensional cube is bipartite: this follows from the fact that
every cycle in the cube has even length. We will show the equivalence a bit later.
CS 70, Fall 2026, Note 10
7


--- page 8 ---
Planar graphs
Non-planar graphs
When a planar graph is drawn on the plane, one can distinguish, besides its vertices (their number will be
denoted v here) and edges (their number is e), the faces of the graph (more precisely, of the drawing). The
faces are the regions into which the graph subdivides the plane. One of them is infinite (the “outer" face),
and the others are finite. The number of faces is denoted f. For example, for the first graph shown f = 4,
and for the fourth (the cube) f = 6.
One basic and important fact about planar graphs is Euler’s formula, v+ f = e+2 (check it for the graphs
above). It has an interesting story. The ancient Greeks knew that this formula held for all polyhedra (check
it for the cube, the tetrahedron, and the octahedron, for example), but could not prove it. How do you do
induction on polyhedra? How do you apply the induction hypothesis? What is a polyhedron minus a vertex,
or an edge? In the 18th century Euler realized that this is an instance of the inability to prove a theorem by
induction because it is too weak, something that we saw time and again when we were studying induction.
To prove the theorem, one has to generalize polyhedra. And the right generalization is planar graphs.
Exercise. Can you see why planar graphs generalize polyhedra? Why are all (convex) polyhedra planar
graphs?
CS 70, Fall 2026, Note 10
8


--- page 9 ---
Theorem 10.3. (Euler’s formula) For every connected planar graph, v+ f = e+2
Proof. By induction on e. It certainly holds when e = 0, and v = f = 1. Now take any connected planar
graph G. There are two cases to consider:
• If G is a tree, then f = 1 (drawing a tree on the plane does not subdivide the plane), and e = v−1. So
the formula holds.
• If G is not a tree, find a cycle and delete any edge of the cycle. This amounts to reducing both e and
f by one. By induction the formula is true in the smaller graph, and so it must be true in the original
one.
Exercise. What happens when the graph is not connected? How does the number of connected compo-
nents enter the formula?
Take a planar graph with f faces, and consider one face. It has a number of sides, that is, edges that bound
it clockwise. Note that an edge may be counted twice, if it has the same face on both sides, as happens for
example in a tree (such edges are called “bridges"). Denote by si the number of sides of face i. Now, if we
add up all the si’s we must get 2e, because each edge is counted twice, once for the face on its right and once
for the face on its left (these may coincide if the edge is a bridge). We conclude that, in any planar graph,
f
∑
i=1
si = 2e
(1)
Now notice that, since we don’t allow parallel edges between the same two nodes, and if we assume that
there are at least two edges (so there are at least three vertices), every face has at least three sides, or si ≥3
for all i. It follows that 3f ≤2e. Solving for f and plugging into Euler’s formula we get
e ≤3v−6.
This is an important fact. First it tells us that planar graphs are sparse: i.e., they cannot have too many
edges. A 1,000-vertex connected graph can have anywhere between a thousand and half a million edges.
This inequality tells us that for planar graphs the range is much smaller, between 999 and 2,994.
It also tells us that K5 is not planar: Just notice that it has five vertices and ten edges.
K3,3 has v = 6,e = 9 so it passes the planarity test with flying colors. We must think a little harder to show
that K3,3 is non-planar. Notice that, if we were able to draw it on the plane, there would be no triangles: this
is because a triangle would mean that either two wells or two houses are connected to each other, which is
not the case. So, we can now strengthen what we get from (1) from 3f ≤2e to 4f ≤2e. Solving for f and
plugging into Euler’s formula as before now yields the stronger conclusion e ≤2v −4, which shows that
K3,3 is indeed non-planar!
So, we have established that K5 and K3,3 are both non-planar. There is something deeper going on: In some
sense, these are the only non-planar graphs. This is made precise in the following famous result, due to the
Polish mathematician Kuratowski (this is what “K” stands for).
Theorem 10.4. A graph G is non-planar if and only if it contains K5 or K3,3.
“Contains" here means the following. For each vertex v of K5 (resp., of K3,3), we need to identify a connected
subgraph Bv of G so that none of the Bv share any vertices and so that, for every edge {u,v} in K5 (resp.,
CS 70, Fall 2026, Note 10
9


--- page 10 ---
in K3,3), there is an edge connecting Bu to Bv. (It’s OK if there are multiple edges connecting Bu and Bv.)
We can think of each of the Bv as representing a vertex of K5 or K3,3, and if we “contract" each of the
subgraphs Bv into a single vertex, they form a copy of K5 or K3,3 (possibly with some extra edges).
To see this in action, consider the the “4-cube” shown in Figure 3. We can see that this is non-planar because
it contains K3,3 as shown: if we denote the vertices on one side of K3,3 as u1,u2,u3, and those on the other
side as v1,v2,v3, then the three red “blobs" of vertices are the subgraphs Bu1,Bu2,Bu3, while the three green
blobs are the subgraphs Bv1,Bv2,Bv3. (Note that each of these B’s are connected, and they are all disjoint.)
Now we can easily check that there is an edge connecting each Bui with each Bvj, i.e., each red blob with
each green blob—these edges are shown in bold in the figure. (Note that there are many other ways of
finding K3,3 in the 4-cube.)
Figure 3: Proof that the 4-cube is not planar, by showing that it contains K3,3
Exercise. Can you find K5 in the same graph? Just as for K3,3 above, this is a bit tricky! (Note that, to
show that a graph is not planar, we only have to show that it contains either K3,3 or K5; the 4-cube happens
to contain both!)
One direction of Kuratowski’s theorem is obvious: If a graph contains one of these two non-planar graphs,
then of course it is itself non-planar. The other direction, namely that in the absence of these graphs we can
draw any graph on the plane, is difficult. If you are interested in a proof, you may want to Google “proof of
Kuratowski’s theorem.”
5
Connectivity and Hypercubes
As we have seen, graphs are an abstract and general construct allowing us to represent relationships between
objects, such as houses and roads. One particularly important application of graphs is as a representation
of the interconnections between routers on the internet (or some other network). To send a packet from one
node to another, we need to find a path in this graph from our source to our destination. Therefore, to be
able to send a packet from any node to any other node, we need the graph to be connected. A minimally
connected graph is called a tree, and it is the most efficient graph (i.e., with the minimum number of edges)
we can use to connect any set of vertices. More specifically, if any one edge (connection) in a tree network
fails, then the network become disconnected and there are some nodes we cannot reach. To avoid this
situation, we want some kind of redundancy, or robustness, in the connectivity of the network.
CS 70, Fall 2026, Note 10
10


--- page 11 ---
At the opposite extreme is the complete graph, which contains a connection between every pair of nodes.
This network is extremely well connected, as the following exercise shows.
Exercise. What is the minimum number of edges which must be removed from Kn to make it discon-
nected? [Hint: how many edges have to be removed to contain an isolated vertex?]
However, the complete graph is completely unrealistic as a network architecture because it contains far too
many edges: n(n−1)
2
∼n2
2 , to be precise. And in practice there is no need for a direct connection between ev-
ery pair of nodes, as long as the maximum node-to-node distance (also called the “diameter" of the network)
is not too large.
In this section, we examine a nice family of graphs called the hypercube graphs, which combines the best of
both worlds: they are robustly connected and have small diameter, but do not use too many edges.
We have discussed how complete graphs are a class of graphs whose vertices are particularly “well-connected.”
However, to achieve this strong connectivity, a large number of edges is required, which in many applica-
tions of graph theory is infeasible. Consider the example of the Connection Machine, which was a massively
parallel computer designed by the company Thinking Machines in the 1980s. The idea of the Connection
Machine was to have a million processors working in parallel, all connected via a communications network.
If you were to connect each pair of such processors with a direct wire to allow them to communicate (i.e., if
you used a complete graph to model your communications network), this would require 1012 wires! What
the builders of the Connection Machine thus decided was to instead use a 20-dimensional hypercube to
model their network, which still allowed a strong level of connectivity, while limiting the number of neigh-
bors of each processor in the network to 20. This section is devoted to studying this particularly useful class
of graphs, known as hypercubes.
The vertex set of the n-dimensional hypercube G = (V,E) is given by V = {0,1}n, where recall {0,1}n
denotes the set of all n-bit strings. In other words, each vertex is labeled by a unique n-bit string, such as
00110···0100. The edge set E is defined as follows: Two vertices x and y are connected by edge {x,y} if
and only if x and y differ in exactly one bit position. For example, x = 0000 and y = 1000 are neighbors, but
x = 0000 and y = 0011 are not. More formally, x = x1x2 ...xn and y = y1y2 ...yn are neighbors if and only if
there is an i ∈{1,...,n} such that xj = yj for all j ̸= i, and xi ̸= yi. To help you visualize the hypercube, we
depict the 1-, 2-, and 3-dimensional hypercubes below.
0
1
00
01
10
11
000
001
100
101
011
010
111
110
We also saw a picture of the 4-dimensional cube earlier, in our discussion of planar graphs (see, e.g., Fig. 3).
There is an alternative and useful way to define the n-dimensional hypercube via recursion, which we now
discuss. Define the 0-subcube (respectively, 1-subcube) as the (n−1)-dimensional hypercube with vertices
labeled by 0x for x ∈{0,1}n−1 (respectively, 1x for x ∈{0,1}n−1). Then, the n-dimensional hypercube is
obtained by placing an edge between each pair of vertices 0x in the 0-subcube and 1x in the 1-subcube.
CS 70, Fall 2026, Note 10
11


--- page 12 ---
Concept check! Where are the 0- and 1-subcubes in the 3-dimensional hypercube depicted above? Can
you use these along with the recursive definition above to draw the 4-dimensional hypercube?
Exercise. Prove that the n-dimensional hypercube has 2n vertices, and that its diameter (maximum length
of a path between any two vertices) is n. [Hint: Use the fact that each bit has two possible settings, 0 or
1.] Note that the diameter is exponentially smaller than the number of vertices!
We began this section by singing the praises of the hypercube in terms of its connectivity properties; we
now investigate these claims formally. Let us warm up by giving two proofs of a simple property of the
hypercube. Each proof relies on one of our two equivalent (namely, direct and recursive) definitions of the
hypercube.
Lemma 10.1. The total number of edges in an n-dimensional hypercube is n2n−1.
Proof 1. The degree of each vertex is n, since n bit positions can be flipped in any x ∈{0,1}n. Since each
edge is counted twice, once from each endpoint, this yields a total of n2n/2 = n2n−1 edges.
Proof 2. By the second definition of the hypercube, it follows that E(n) = 2E(n−1)+2n−1, and E(1) = 1,
where E(n) denotes the number of edges in the n-dimensional hypercube. A straightforward induction
shows that E(n) = n2n−1.
Exercise. Use induction to show that in Proof 2 above, E(n) = n2n−1.
Let us now focus on the question of connectivity, and prove that the n-dimensional hypercube is well-
connected in the following sense: To disconnect any subset S ⊆V of vertices from the rest of the graph, a
large number of edges must be removed. In particular, we shall see that the number of removed edges must
scale with |S|. In the theorem below, recall that V −S = {v ∈V | v /∈S} is the set of vertices that are not in
S.
Theorem 10.5. Let S ⊆V be such that |S| ≤|V −S| (i.e., that |S| ≤2n−1), and let ES denote the set of edges
connecting S to V −S, i.e.,
ES := {{u,v} ∈E | u ∈S and v ∈V −S}.
Then, it holds that |ES| ≥|S|.
Proof. We proceed by induction on n.
Base case (n = 1): The 1-dimensional hypercube graph has two vertices 0 and 1, and one edge {0,1}. We
also have the assumption |S| ≤21−1 = 1, so there are two possibilities. First, if |S| = 0, then the claim
trivially holds. Otherwise, if |S| = 1, then S = {0} and V −S = {1}, or vice versa. In either case we have
ES = {0,1}, so |ES| = 1 = |S|.
Inductive hypothesis: Assume the claim holds for 1 ≤n ≤k.
Inductive step: We prove the claim for n = k + 1. Recall that we have the assumption |S| ≤2k. Let S0
(respectively, S1) be the vertices from the 0-subcube (respectively, 1-subcube) in S. We may assume without
loss of generality that |S0| ≥|S1|: if not, then we can just interchange the roles of S0 and S1 in the argument
below. We have two cases to examine: Either S has a fairly equal intersection size with the 0- and 1-subcubes,
or it does not.
CS 70, Fall 2026, Note 10
12


--- page 13 ---
1. Case 1: |S0| ≤2k−1 and |S1| ≤2k−1
In this case, we can apply the induction hypothesis separately to the 0- and 1-subcubes. This says
that, restricted to just the 0-subcube, there are at least |S0| edges between |S0| and its complement
(in the 0-subcube), and similarly there are at least |S1| edges between |S1| and its complement (in
the 1-subcube). Thus, the total number of edges between S and V −S is at least |S0| + |S1| = |S|, as
desired.
2. Case 2: |S0| > 2k−1
In this case, S0 is unfortunately too large for the induction hypothesis to apply. However, note that
since |S| ≤2k, we have |S1| = |S|−|S0| ≤2k−1, so we can apply the hypothesis to S1. As in Case 1,
this allows us to conclude that there are at least |S1| edges in the 1-subcube crossing between S and
V −S.
What about the 0-subcube? Here, we cannot apply the induction hypothesis directly, but there is a
way to apply it after a little massaging. Consider the set V0 −S0, where V0 is the set of vertices in the
0-subcube. Note that |V0| = 2k and |V0 −S0| = |V0| −|S0| = 2k −|S0| < 2k −2k−1 = 2k−1. Thus, we
can apply the inductive hypothesis to the set V0 −S0. This yields that the number of edges between
S0 and V0 −S0 is at least 2k −|S0|. Adding our totals for the 0-subcube and the 1-subcube so far, we
conclude there are at least 2k −|S0| + |S1| crossing edges between S and V −S. However, recall our
goal was to show that the number of crossing edges is at least |S|; thus, we are still short of where we
wish to be.
But there are still some edges we have not accounted for — namely, those in ES which cross between
the 0- and 1-subcubes. Since there is an edge between every vertex of the form 0x and the corre-
sponding vertex 1x, we conclude there are at least |S0|−|S1| edges in ES that cross between the two
subcubes. Thus, the total number of edges crossing is at least 2k −|S0|+|S1|+|S0|−|S1| = 2k ≥|S|,
as desired.
6
Practice Problems
1. A de Bruijn sequence is a 2n-bit circular sequence such that every string of length n occurs as a
contiguous substring of the sequence exactly once. For example, the following is a de Bruijn sequence
for the case n = 3:
0
0
1
0
1
1
1
0
Notice that there are eight substrings of length three, each of which corresponds to a binary number
from 0 to 7 such as 000, 001, 010, etc. It turns out that such sequences can be generated from the de
Bruijn graph, which is a directed graph G = (V,E) on the vertex set V = {0,1}n−1, i.e., the set of all
n−1 bit strings. Each vertex a1a2...an−1 ∈V has two outgoing edges:
(a1a2 ...an−1, a2a3 ...an−10) ∈E
and
(a1a2 ...an−1, a2a3 ...an−11) ∈E.
CS 70, Fall 2026, Note 10
13


--- page 14 ---
Therefore, each vertex also has two incoming edges:
(0a1a2 ...an−2, a1a2 ...an−1) ∈E
and
(1a1a2 ...an−2, a1a2 ...an−1) ∈E.
For example, for n = 4, the vertex 110 has two outgoing edges directed toward 100 and 101, and two
incoming edges from 011 and 111. Note that these are directed edges, and self-loops are permitted.
The de Bruijn sequence is generated by an Eulerian tour in the de Bruijn graph. Euler’s theorem
(Theorem 10.1) can be modified to work for directed graphs — all we need to modify is the second
condition, which should now say: “For every vertex v in V, the in-degree of v equals the out-degree
of v." Clearly, the de Bruijn graph satisfies this condition, and therefore it has an Eulerian tour.
To actually generate the sequence, starting from any vertex, we walk along the tour and add the
corresponding bit which was shifted in from the right as we traverse each edge. Here is the de Bruijn
graph for n = 3.
10
00
01
11
Find the Eulerian tour of this graph that generates the de Bruijn sequence given above.
2. In this question, we complete the induction component of the proof of Theorem 10.2.
(a) Suppose in the proof that G′ has two distinct connected components G′
1 and G′
2. Complete the
inductive step to show that G is connected and has n−1 edges. (Hint: Argue that you can apply
the induction hypothesis to G′
1 and G′
2 separately. Note that this requires strong induction!)
(b) More generally, G′ may have t ≥2 distinct connected components G′
1 through G′
t — generalize
your argument above to this setting in order to complete the proof of Theorem 10.2.
Life lesson. This question teaches you a general paradigm for solving problems, be it in computer
science research or everyday life. Specifically, when faced with a difficult problem (such as the
proof of Theorem 10.2), first try to solve it in the simplest case possible (such as when G′ is
connected). Then, gradually extend your solution to handle more difficult cases until you establish
the general claim (i.e., G′ has t connected components).
3. Prove using induction on the number of vertices n that any connected graph must have at least n−1
edges.
CS 70, Fall 2026, Note 10
14
